10/10/23, 10:15 AMAR6 Synthesis Report: Summary for Policymakers Headline StatementsHeadline StatementsHeadline statements are the overarching conclusions of the approvedSummary for Policymakers which, taken together, provide a concisenarrative.AA.1A.2Current Status and TrendsObserved Warming and its CausesHuman activities, principally through emissions of greenhouse gases,have unequivocally caused global warming, with global surfacetemperature reaching 1.1°C above 1850–1900 in 2011–2020. Globalgreenhouse gas emissions have continued to increase, with unequalhistorical and ongoing contributions arising from unsustainable energyuse, land use and land-use change, lifestyles and patterns ofconsumption and production across regions, between and withincountries, and among individuals (high confidence). {2.1, Figure 2.1,Figure 2.2}.Observed Changes and ImpactsWidespread and rapid changes in the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphereand biosphere have occurred. Human-caused climate change isalready affecting many weather and climate extremes in every regionacross the globe. This has led to widespread adverse impacts andrelated losses and damages to nature and people (high confidence).Vulnerable communities who have historically contributed the least tocurrent climate change are disproportionately affected (highconfidence). {2.1, Table 2.1, Figure 2.2 and 2.3} (Figure SPM.1)Current Progress in Adaptation and Gaps and Challengeshttps://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/resources/spm-headline-statements/1/6AR6SynthesisReportRESOURCESDOWNLOADREAD ONLINE 10/10/23, 10:15 AMAR6 Synthesis Report: Summary for Policymakers Headline StatementsA.3Adaptation planning and implementation has progressed across allA.4BB.1sectors and regions, with documented benefits and varyingeffectiveness. Despite progress, adaptation gaps exist, and willcontinue to grow at current rates of implementation. Hard and softlimits to adaptation have been reached in some ecosystems andregions. Maladaptation is happening in some sectors and regions.Current global financial flows for adaptation are insufficient for, andconstrain implementation of, adaptation options, especially indeveloping countries (high confidence). {2.2, 2.3}Current Mitigation Progress, Gaps and ChallengesPolicies and laws addressing mitigation have consistently expandedsince AR5. Global GHG emissions in 2030 implied by nationallydetermined contributions (NDCs) announced by October 2021 make itlikely that warming will exceed 1.5°C during the 21st century and make itharder to limit warming below 2°C. There are gaps between projectedemissions from implemented policies and those from NDCs andfinance flows fall short of the levels needed to meet climate goalsacross all sectors and regions. (high confidence) {2.2, 2.3, Figure 2.5,Table 2.2}Future Climate Change, Risks, and Long-TermResponsesFuture Climate ChangeContinued greenhouse gas emissions will lead to increasing globalwarming, with the best estimate of reaching 1.5°C in the near term inconsidered scenarios and modelled pathways. Every increment ofglobal warming will intensify multiple and concurrent hazards (highconfidence). Deep, rapid, and sustained reductions in greenhouse gasemissions would lead to a discernible slowdown in global warmingwithin around two decades, and also to discernible changes inatmospheric composition within a few years (high confidence). {Cross-Section Boxes 1 and 2, 3.1, 3.3, Table 3.1, Figure 3.1, 4.3} (Figure SPM.2,Box SPM.1)Climate Change Impacts and Climate-Related RisksB.2For any given future warming level, many climate-related risks arehigher than assessed in AR5, and projected long-term impacts are upto multiple times higher than currently observed (high confidence).Risks and projected adverse impacts and related losses and damagesfrom climate change escalate with every increment of global warming(very high confidence). Climatic and non-climatic risks will increasinglyinteract, creating compound and cascading risks that are morecomplex and difficult to manage (high confidence). {Cross-SectionBox.2, 3.1, 4.3, Figure 3.3, Figure 4.3} (Figure SPM.3, Figure SPM.4)https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/resources/spm-headline-statements/2/610/10/23, 10:15 AMAR6 Synthesis Report: Summary for Policymakers Headline StatementsB.3B.4Likelihood and Risks of Unavoidable, Irreversible or AbruptChangesSome future changes are unavoidable and/or irreversible but can belimited by deep, rapid and sustained global greenhouse gas emissionsreduction. The likelihood of abrupt and/or irreversible changesincreases with higher global warming levels. Similarly, the probability oflow-likelihood outcomes associated with potentially very large adverseimpacts increases with higher global warming levels. (high confidence){3.1}Adaptation Options and their Limits in a Warmer WorldAdaptation options that are feasible and effective today will becomeconstrained and less effective with increasing global warming. Withincreasing global warming, losses and damages will increase andadditional human and natural systems will reach adaptation limits.Maladaptation can be avoided by flexible, multi-sectoral, inclusive, long-term planning and implementation of adaptation actions, with co-benefits to many sectors and systems. (high confidence) {3.2, 4.1, 4.2,4.3}Carbon Budgets and Net Zero EmissionsB.5Limiting human-caused global warming requires net zero CO2emissions. Cumulative carbon emissions until the time of reaching net-zero CO2 emissions and the level of greenhouse gas emissionreductions this decade largely determine whether warming can belimited to 1.5°C or 2°C (high confidence). Projected CO2 emissions fromexisting fossil fuel infrastructure without additional abatement wouldexceed the remaining carbon budget for 1.5°C (50%) (high confidence).{2.3, 3.1, 3.3, Table 3.1}Mitigation PathwaysAll global modelled pathways that limit warming to 1.5°C (>50%) with noor limited overshoot, and those that limit warming to 2°C (>67%), involverapid and deep and, in most cases, immediate greenhouse gasemissions reductions in all sectors this decade. Global net zero CO2emissions are reached for these pathway categories, in the early 2050sand around the early 2070s, respectively. (high confidence) {3.3, 3.4, 4.1,4.5, Table 3.1} (Figure SPM.5, Box SPM.1)Overshoot: Exceeding a Warming Level and ReturningIf warming exceeds a specified level such as 1.5°C, it could gradually bereduced again by achieving and sustaining net negative global CO2emissions. This would require additional deployment of carbon dioxideremoval, compared to pathways without overshoot, leading to greaterfeasibility and sustainability concerns. Overshoot entails adverseimpacts, some irreversible, and additional risks for human and naturalB.6B.7https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/resources/spm-headline-statements/3/610/10/23, 10:15 AMAR6 Synthesis Report: Summary for Policymakers Headline StatementsCC.1C.2C.3C.4systems, all growing with the magnitude and duration of overshoot.(high confidence) {3.1, 3.3, 3.4, Table 3.1, Figure 3.6}Responses in the Near TermUrgency of Near-Term Integrated Climate ActionClimate change is a threat to human well-being and planetary health(very high confidence). There is a rapidly closing window of opportunityto secure a liveable and sustainable future for all (very high confidence).Climate resilient development integrates adaptation and mitigation toadvance sustainable development for all, and is enabled by increasedinternational cooperation including improved access to adequatefinancial resources, particularly for vulnerable regions, sectors andgroups, and inclusive governance and coordinated policies (highconfidence). The choices and actions implemented in this decade willhave impacts now and for thousands of years (high confidence). {3.1, 3.3,4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, Figure 3.1, Figure 3.3, Figure 4.2} (FigureSPM.1; Figure SPM.6)The Benefits of Near-Term ActionDeep, rapid and sustained mitigation and accelerated implementationof adaptation actions in this decade would reduce projected losses anddamages for humans and ecosystems (very high confidence), anddeliver many co-benefits, especially for air quality and health (highconfidence). Delayed mitigation and adaptation action would lock-inhigh-emissions infrastructure, raise risks of stranded assets and cost-escalation, reduce feasibility, and increase losses and damages (highconfidence). Near-term actions involve high up-front investments andpotentially disruptive changes that can be lessened by a range ofenabling policies (high confidence). {2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3,4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8}Mitigation and Adaptation Options across SystemsRapid and far-reaching transitions across all sectors and systems arenecessary to achieve deep and sustained emissions reductions andsecure a liveable and sustainable future for all. These systemtransitions involve a significant upscaling of a wide portfolio ofmitigation and adaptation options. Feasible, effective, and low-costoptions for mitigation and adaptation are already available, withdifferences across systems and regions. (high confidence) {4.1, 4.5, 4.6}(Figure SPM.7)Synergies and Trade-Offs with Sustainable DevelopmentAccelerated and equitable action in mitigating and adapting to climatechange impacts is critical to sustainable development. Mitigation andadaptation actions have more synergies than trade-offs withSustainable Development Goals. Synergies and trade-offs depend onhttps://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/resources/spm-headline-statements/4/610/10/23, 10:15 AMAR6 Synthesis Report: Summary for Policymakers Headline Statementscontext and scale of implementation. (high confidence) {3.4, 4.2, 4.4,C.5C.6C.74.5, 4.6, 4.9, Figure 4.5}Equity and InclusionPrioritising equity, climate justice, social justice, inclusion and justtransition processes can enable adaptation and ambitious mitigationactions and climate resilient development. Adaptation outcomes areenhanced by increased support to regions and people with the highestvulnerability to climatic hazards. Integrating climate adaptation intosocial protection programs improves resilience. Many options areavailable for reducing emission-intensive consumption, includingthrough behavioural and lifestyle changes, with co-benefits for societalwell-being. (high confidence) {4.4, 4.5}Governance and PoliciesEffective climate action is enabled by political commitment, well-aligned multilevel governance, institutional frameworks, laws, policiesand strategies and enhanced access to finance and technology. Cleargoals, coordination across multiple policy domains, and inclusivegovernance processes facilitate effective climate action. Regulatoryand economic instruments can support deep emissions reductions andclimate resilience if scaled up and applied widely. Climate resilientdevelopment benefits from drawing on diverse knowledge. (highconfidence) {2.2, 4.4, 4.5, 4.7}Finance, Technology and International CooperationFinance, technology and international cooperation are critical enablersfor accelerated climate action. If climate goals are to be achieved, bothadaptation and mitigation financing would need to increase many-fold.There is sufficient global capital to close the global investment gaps butthere are barriers to redirect capital to climate action. Enhancingtechnology innovation systems is key to accelerate the widespreadadoption of technologies and practices. Enhancing internationalcooperation is possible through multiple channels. (high confidence){2.3, 4.8}© Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2023https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/resources/spm-headline-statements/5/610/10/23, 10:15 AMAR6 Synthesis Report: Summary for Policymakers Headline StatementsA B O U TC O P Y R I G H TD I S C L A I M E R   P R I V A C Y   P O L I C Yhttps://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/resources/spm-headline-statements/6/6