10/10/23, 10:15 AM

AR6 Synthesis Report: Summary for Policymakers Headline Statements

Headline Statements

Headline statements are the overarching conclusions of the approved
Summary for Policymakers which, taken together, provide a concise
narrative.

A

A.1

A.2

Current Status and Trends

Observed Warming and its Causes

Human activities, principally through emissions of greenhouse gases,

have unequivocally caused global warming, with global surface

temperature reaching 1.1°C above 1850–1900 in 2011–2020. Global

greenhouse gas emissions have continued to increase, with unequal

historical and ongoing contributions arising from unsustainable energy

use, land use and land-use change, lifestyles and patterns of

consumption and production across regions, between and within

countries, and among individuals (high confidence). {2.1, Figure 2.1,

Figure 2.2}.

Observed Changes and Impacts

Widespread and rapid changes in the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere

and biosphere have occurred. Human-caused climate change is
already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region
across the globe. This has led to widespread adverse impacts and

related losses and damages to nature and people (high confidence).
Vulnerable communities who have historically contributed the least to
current climate change are disproportionately affected (high
confidence). {2.1, Table 2.1, Figure 2.2 and 2.3} (Figure SPM.1)

Current Progress in Adaptation and Gaps and Challenges

https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/resources/spm-headline-statements/

1/6

AR6SynthesisReportRESOURCESDOWNLOADREAD ONLINE 
10/10/23, 10:15 AM

AR6 Synthesis Report: Summary for Policymakers Headline Statements

A.3

Adaptation planning and implementation has progressed across all

A.4

B

B.1

sectors and regions, with documented benefits and varying

effectiveness. Despite progress, adaptation gaps exist, and will

continue to grow at current rates of implementation. Hard and soft

limits to adaptation have been reached in some ecosystems and

regions. Maladaptation is happening in some sectors and regions.

Current global financial flows for adaptation are insufficient for, and

constrain implementation of, adaptation options, especially in

developing countries (high confidence). {2.2, 2.3}

Current Mitigation Progress, Gaps and Challenges

Policies and laws addressing mitigation have consistently expanded

since AR5. Global GHG emissions in 2030 implied by nationally

determined contributions (NDCs) announced by October 2021 make it
likely that warming will exceed 1.5°C during the 21st century and make it

harder to limit warming below 2°C. There are gaps between projected

emissions from implemented policies and those from NDCs and
finance flows fall short of the levels needed to meet climate goals

across all sectors and regions. (high confidence) {2.2, 2.3, Figure 2.5,

Table 2.2}

Future Climate Change, Risks, and Long-Term
Responses

Future Climate Change

Continued greenhouse gas emissions will lead to increasing global

warming, with the best estimate of reaching 1.5°C in the near term in
considered scenarios and modelled pathways. Every increment of

global warming will intensify multiple and concurrent hazards (high

confidence). Deep, rapid, and sustained reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions would lead to a discernible slowdown in global warming

within around two decades, and also to discernible changes in

atmospheric composition within a few years (high confidence). {Cross-
Section Boxes 1 and 2, 3.1, 3.3, Table 3.1, Figure 3.1, 4.3} (Figure SPM.2,

Box SPM.1)

Climate Change Impacts and Climate-Related Risks

B.2

For any given future warming level, many climate-related risks are

higher than assessed in AR5, and projected long-term impacts are up

to multiple times higher than currently observed (high confidence).
Risks and projected adverse impacts and related losses and damages

from climate change escalate with every increment of global warming

(very high confidence). Climatic and non-climatic risks will increasingly
interact, creating compound and cascading risks that are more

complex and difficult to manage (high confidence). {Cross-Section

Box.2, 3.1, 4.3, Figure 3.3, Figure 4.3} (Figure SPM.3, Figure SPM.4)

https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/resources/spm-headline-statements/

2/6

10/10/23, 10:15 AM

AR6 Synthesis Report: Summary for Policymakers Headline Statements

B.3

B.4

Likelihood and Risks of Unavoidable, Irreversible or Abrupt
Changes

Some future changes are unavoidable and/or irreversible but can be

limited by deep, rapid and sustained global greenhouse gas emissions
reduction. The likelihood of abrupt and/or irreversible changes

increases with higher global warming levels. Similarly, the probability of

low-likelihood outcomes associated with potentially very large adverse
impacts increases with higher global warming levels. (high confidence)

{3.1}

Adaptation Options and their Limits in a Warmer World

Adaptation options that are feasible and effective today will become

constrained and less effective with increasing global warming. With

increasing global warming, losses and damages will increase and
additional human and natural systems will reach adaptation limits.

Maladaptation can be avoided by flexible, multi-sectoral, inclusive, long-

term planning and implementation of adaptation actions, with co-
benefits to many sectors and systems. (high confidence) {3.2, 4.1, 4.2,

4.3}

Carbon Budgets and Net Zero Emissions

B.5

Limiting human-caused global warming requires net zero CO2

emissions. Cumulative carbon emissions until the time of reaching net-

zero CO2 emissions and the level of greenhouse gas emission
reductions this decade largely determine whether warming can be

limited to 1.5°C or 2°C (high confidence). Projected CO2 emissions from

existing fossil fuel infrastructure without additional abatement would
exceed the remaining carbon budget for 1.5°C (50%) (high confidence).
{2.3, 3.1, 3.3, Table 3.1}

Mitigation Pathways

All global modelled pathways that limit warming to 1.5°C (>50%) with no
or limited overshoot, and those that limit warming to 2°C (>67%), involve
rapid and deep and, in most cases, immediate greenhouse gas

emissions reductions in all sectors this decade. Global net zero CO2
emissions are reached for these pathway categories, in the early 2050s
and around the early 2070s, respectively. (high confidence) {3.3, 3.4, 4.1,

4.5, Table 3.1} (Figure SPM.5, Box SPM.1)

Overshoot: Exceeding a Warming Level and Returning

If warming exceeds a specified level such as 1.5°C, it could gradually be

reduced again by achieving and sustaining net negative global CO2
emissions. This would require additional deployment of carbon dioxide
removal, compared to pathways without overshoot, leading to greater

feasibility and sustainability concerns. Overshoot entails adverse
impacts, some irreversible, and additional risks for human and natural

B.6

B.7

https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/resources/spm-headline-statements/

3/6

10/10/23, 10:15 AM

AR6 Synthesis Report: Summary for Policymakers Headline Statements

C

C.1

C.2

C.3

C.4

systems, all growing with the magnitude and duration of overshoot.
(high confidence) {3.1, 3.3, 3.4, Table 3.1, Figure 3.6}

Responses in the Near Term

Urgency of Near-Term Integrated Climate Action

Climate change is a threat to human well-being and planetary health
(very high confidence). There is a rapidly closing window of opportunity
to secure a liveable and sustainable future for all (very high confidence).

Climate resilient development integrates adaptation and mitigation to
advance sustainable development for all, and is enabled by increased
international cooperation including improved access to adequate

financial resources, particularly for vulnerable regions, sectors and
groups, and inclusive governance and coordinated policies (high
confidence). The choices and actions implemented in this decade will

have impacts now and for thousands of years (high confidence). {3.1, 3.3,
4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, Figure 3.1, Figure 3.3, Figure 4.2} (Figure
SPM.1; Figure SPM.6)

The Benefits of Near-Term Action

Deep, rapid and sustained mitigation and accelerated implementation
of adaptation actions in this decade would reduce projected losses and

damages for humans and ecosystems (very high confidence), and
deliver many co-benefits, especially for air quality and health (high
confidence). Delayed mitigation and adaptation action would lock-in
high-emissions infrastructure, raise risks of stranded assets and cost-

escalation, reduce feasibility, and increase losses and damages (high
confidence). Near-term actions involve high up-front investments and
potentially disruptive changes that can be lessened by a range of

enabling policies (high confidence). {2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3,
4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8}

Mitigation and Adaptation Options across Systems

Rapid and far-reaching transitions across all sectors and systems are
necessary to achieve deep and sustained emissions reductions and
secure a liveable and sustainable future for all. These system

transitions involve a significant upscaling of a wide portfolio of
mitigation and adaptation options. Feasible, effective, and low-cost
options for mitigation and adaptation are already available, with

differences across systems and regions. (high confidence) {4.1, 4.5, 4.6}
(Figure SPM.7)

Synergies and Trade-Offs with Sustainable Development

Accelerated and equitable action in mitigating and adapting to climate
change impacts is critical to sustainable development. Mitigation and
adaptation actions have more synergies than trade-offs with

Sustainable Development Goals. Synergies and trade-offs depend on

https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/resources/spm-headline-statements/

4/6

10/10/23, 10:15 AM

AR6 Synthesis Report: Summary for Policymakers Headline Statements

context and scale of implementation. (high confidence) {3.4, 4.2, 4.4,

C.5

C.6

C.7

4.5, 4.6, 4.9, Figure 4.5}

Equity and Inclusion

Prioritising equity, climate justice, social justice, inclusion and just
transition processes can enable adaptation and ambitious mitigation
actions and climate resilient development. Adaptation outcomes are

enhanced by increased support to regions and people with the highest
vulnerability to climatic hazards. Integrating climate adaptation into
social protection programs improves resilience. Many options are
available for reducing emission-intensive consumption, including

through behavioural and lifestyle changes, with co-benefits for societal
well-being. (high confidence) {4.4, 4.5}

Governance and Policies

Effective climate action is enabled by political commitment, well-
aligned multilevel governance, institutional frameworks, laws, policies
and strategies and enhanced access to finance and technology. Clear

goals, coordination across multiple policy domains, and inclusive
governance processes facilitate effective climate action. Regulatory
and economic instruments can support deep emissions reductions and

climate resilience if scaled up and applied widely. Climate resilient
development benefits from drawing on diverse knowledge. (high
confidence) {2.2, 4.4, 4.5, 4.7}

Finance, Technology and International Cooperation

Finance, technology and international cooperation are critical enablers
for accelerated climate action. If climate goals are to be achieved, both

adaptation and mitigation financing would need to increase many-fold.
There is sufficient global capital to close the global investment gaps but
there are barriers to redirect capital to climate action. Enhancing

technology innovation systems is key to accelerate the widespread
adoption of technologies and practices. Enhancing international
cooperation is possible through multiple channels. (high confidence)

{2.3, 4.8}

© Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2023

https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/resources/spm-headline-statements/

5/6

10/10/23, 10:15 AM

AR6 Synthesis Report: Summary for Policymakers Headline Statements

A B O U T

C O P Y R I G H T

D I S C L A I M E R

   

P R I V A C Y   P O L I C Y

https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/resources/spm-headline-statements/

6/6

